---
title: Tech Interviewing
date: '2022-03-13T22:12:03.287Z'
---

Over the last five years of my career, I've run at least three hundred tech interviews -- this averages out to an interview roughly once every four workdays: 300/(50*5*5). Over that time, I've picked up on some processes I think are good ideas, have tried a whole bunch of popular concepts, and have established some decently good methodologies for finding a signal for an approve or reject decision.

In this article, I'll be specifically referring to the technical interview -- usually in the form of a screening or in-person final interview stages. Behavioral interviews are interesting but an entirely different animal; one that I'm not particularly expert at yet.

To start, I think it's important to lay out exactly what you're looking for, from an interviewer level. I don't believe in "hitting the ground running" -- if a new hire can be immediately a value-positive addition, this implies that you're not doing anything interesting, that there's nothing new to learn and no conventions or terminology to learn. That kind of environment is not one that engineers will stick around with for long -- be extremely careful about expecting impact quickly! On the other hand, I do expect some signal that the candidate will be value-positive as quickly as possible; that is to say, that they are self-motivated, can teach themselves given the proper resources, and can learn quickly. I usually expect a new hire to be mildly productive by 4-6 weeks in, and up to speed on at least one area of expertise within 8-10 weeks.

Figuring out if a candidate should be persued given their experience can be tough. I'm usually looking for some close-ish application, so I might move forward on a Vue expert for a React job, but wouldn't proceed if the candidate had no prior front-end experience. This varies from company to company, and there's much more leniency closer to the junior side. Point is, an exact fit on the technologies being used is not a good metric, but you typically want _something_ close so that it eases the ramp-up time. Since average tenure in the tech field is short, spending months having a candidate learn entirely new concepts from scratch is rarely a good call.

Let's say a resume comes across your desk that looks promising -- what should you do? It's important to have a process in place that follows up as quickly as possible, a system that requires as little investment as possible from your end (since interviewing is expensive), and as little investment as possible from the candidate's end (since requiring many interviews is not respectful of the candidate's time). All this must be balanced while gaining an accurate signal regarding the candidate's fit for the position.

Upon hiring manager approval of the resume, recruiters should reach out immediately and schedule a short meeting to validate fit. I strongly prefer when someone from the team, ideally the hiring manager themself, does this interview. It shows that we care enough to invest time upfront, and by having a 30-minute undirected discussion, we can filter out those who just don't seem like culture fits, or they can decide that what we do isn't a good fit, and so on. It lets the candidate ask the questions that they usually have to wait to ask until the end of a long process, and I think candidates appreciate that. Sometimes I'll throw in a simple (<5 minutes) coding interview to ensure that the candidate actually can code.

Assuming both sides are happy, I proceed to a screening interview, typically a 60-minute coding session centered around algorithms. This shouldn't be trivia, or require some particularly complex problem-solving -- no red-black trees or anything like that.

For more senior candidates, we sometimes add a presentation interview, where the candidate gets about 30 minutes to present on a subject they know a lot about. The idea is to understand how well the candidate can lead a small project, communicate information, and to understand how strong their grasp is on the subject they consider best. We don't run this interview for most candidates because it's expensive -- for ten people in the meeting, that's 10 hours of worker-time invested.

On LinkedIn, you'll see lots of stories about hiring people with less-than-ideal credentials but a great attitude, and how they grow into a top performer. There's a certain amount of truth there, but it's not so simple -- a lot of these people just actually aren't all that good. A good attitude is an important trait, after all you're going to have to work with the individual if they get hired, and a good attitude also tends to correlate with self-learning ability... but it rarely beats out proven skill. There's a certain objective value in the Google-style interview question; you'll rarely see someone who passes those interviews who is terrible on the job, and you'll rarely see someone who flunks them who is great, even given a lot of runway. To me, the more important part of it is thinking more holistically about the candidate -- some aren't particularly strong on the algorithms but can get the job done in other areas, and has other skills that more than make up for it.


